[READY FOR REVIEW] Ethics informed licensing - extension of and partial re-write of the licening section in reproducible research (#3142)
the-turing-way/the-turing-way: book/website/reproducible-research/licensing/licensing-ethical-source.md

(rr-licensing-ethical)=
# 'Ethical Source'

The ethical source movement seeks to affirmatively protect specific user rights by curtailing freedom 0, the freedom to use software 'for any purpose' and prohibiting the use of the software for unethical purposes.
Consequently, these licence by the classical definitions of free and open-source software from the FSF and OSI would not be considered free or open-source licences, they do however generally resemble them in the  other three criteria of the definition.
Their merits versus conventional open-source licenses has been the subject of some debate, and their adoption has thus far been relatively limited.

> A leading figure in this movement is Coraline Ada Ehmke creator of the [contributor covenant](https://www.contributor-covenant.org/), the [Hippocratic License](https://firstdonoharm.dev/), and the founder in 2020 of the [organisation for ethical source](https://ethicalsource.dev/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A leading figure in this movement is Coraline Ada Ehmke creator of the [Contributor Covenant](https://www.contributor-covenant.org/), the [Hippocratic License](https://firstdonoharm.dev/), and the founder in 2020 of the [Organisation for Ethical Source](https://ethicalsource.dev/).
```

In the words of its advocates, [Ethical Source](https://ethicalsource.dev/) was created to "empower developers, giving us the freedom and agency to ensure that our work is being used for social good and in service of human rights."
Motivated by the growing use of open source software for technologies such as mass surveillance and racial profiling, the movement aims to reduce this "misuse" of open-source software.

> Ethical Source extends upon the principles of open source to provide developers additional means to ensure their work is used for applications aligned with ethical values important to them like:
> - Advocating for workers' rights and human rights

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ethical Source extends upon the principles of open source to provide developers additional means to ensure their work is used for applications aligned with ethical values important to them like:

- Advocating for workers' rights and human rights
```

The core Hippocratic licence, for example, prohibits a variety of human rights abuses and mandates equal pay for equal work.
It can be further extended using [their licence building tool](https://firstdonoharm.dev/build/) with modules covering:

- Fossil Fuel Divestment
- Ecocide
- Extractive Industries
- Boycott / Divestment / Sanctions
- Taliban
- Myanmar
- Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region
- US Tariff Act
- Mass Surveillance
- Military Activities
- Law Enforcement
- Media
- Social Auditing
- Workers on Board of Directors
- Supply Chain Transparency
- Copyleft

Licensees are given 30 days upon notification of a violation or harm to remedy them before the license is terminated.
The potential difficulty of demonstrating compliance with these terms and of bringing effective legal action against any party not complying with them has attracted some skepticism about the effectiveness of this approach.

(rr-licensing-ethical-risks)=
## Potential Risks

In the absence of case law deciding on license enforcement decisions for these licenses it is as yet unknown what (if any) administrative burden may be associated with demonstrating compliance with ethical source and RAIL licences.

> Whilst unlikely for any given user of software licenced in this fashion, it is hypothetically possible that such licences could be weaponised by bad actors seeking to impose costs on the entities using the licences, as [has occurred before](https://onezero.medium.com/beware-the-copyleft-trolls-a8b85c66b7eb) with 'exploits' in open licences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While unlikely, it is hypothetically possible that such licences could be weaponised by bad actors seeking to impose costs on the entities using the licences, as [has occurred before](https://onezero.medium.com/beware-the-copyleft-trolls-a8b85c66b7eb) with 'exploits' in open licences.
```

Author: Yes - a simpler sentence would be better here. Just want to clarify that this could be more of an issue for an org. developing something based off of tooling licensed in this way than an end user.

Reviewer: Maybe it can be split into more sentences?

- Licenses with more restrictions are more able to be weaponised (not sure if that is quite what you want to say)
- It is unlikely but there are examples of this happening
- Some groups may be particularly vulnerable to this

Author: I have attempted to clarify this, provide a hypothetical example and added a point about potential issues with incentivisation / providing cover for the use of technical enforcement measures in [75fca26](https://github.com/the-turing-way/the-turing-way/pull/3142/commits/75fca268d6b80716632bbf2e1898218e6c27588b)

(rr-licensing-ethical)=
# 'Ethical Source'

The ethical source movement seeks to affirmatively protect specific user rights by curtailing freedom 0, the freedom to use software 'for any purpose' and prohibiting the use of the software for unethical purposes.

> Consequently, these licence by the classical definitions of free and open-source software from the FSF and OSI would not be considered free or open-source licences, they do however generally resemble them in the  other three criteria of the definition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consequently, these licences by the classical definitions of free and open-source software from the FSF and OSI would not be considered free or open-source licences.
The ethical course licences do generally resemble them in the other three criteria of the definition.
```

Reviewer 2: Sentence is quite long

Reviewer 2: Is it 'open source' or open-source. I'm used to open source. I guess it doesn't matter too much as long as your consistent in the section/chapter!

In the words of its advocates, [Ethical Source](https://ethicalsource.dev/) was created to "empower developers, giving us the freedom and agency to ensure that our work is being used for social good and in service of human rights."
Motivated by the growing use of open source software for technologies such as mass surveillance and racial profiling, the movement aims to reduce this "misuse" of open-source software.

Ethical Source extends upon the principles of open source to provide developers additional means to ensure their work is used for applications aligned with ethical values important to them like:

- Advocating for workers' rights and human rights
- Ensuring protections against violence and discrimination
- Protecting privacy

A list of Ethical Licenses and their targeted applications can be found on the [Ethical Source website](https://ethicalsource.dev/licenses/).
The core Hippocratic licence, for example, prohibits a variety of human rights abuses and mandates equal pay for equal work.

> It can be further extended using [their licence building tool](https://firstdonoharm.dev/build/) with modules covering:

Reviewer 2: Is this overview of the models complete? Otherwise maybe select a couple instead of the whole list?

Author: Yes I believe that is a complete list of their modules. Do you think I should just pick a few examples instead of the full list?

- Fossil Fuel Divestment
- Ecocide
- Extractive Industries
- Boycott / Divestment / Sanctions
- Taliban
- Myanmar
- Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region
- US Tariff Act
- Mass Surveillance
- Military Activities
- Law Enforcement
- Media
- Social Auditing
- Workers on Board of Directors
- Supply Chain Transparency
- Copyleft

Licensees are given 30 days upon notification of a violation or harm to remedy them before the license is terminated.
The potential difficulty of demonstrating compliance with these terms and of bringing effective legal action against any party not complying with them has attracted some skepticism about the effectiveness of this approach.

(rr-licensing-ethical-risks)=
## Potential Risks

> In the absence of case law deciding on license enforcement decisions for these licenses it is as yet unknown what (if any) administrative burden may be associated with demonstrating compliance with ethical source and RAIL licences.

Reviewer 2: Is it licence or license - there's some inconsistent spelling going on

Author: Addressed in [d89f022](https://github.com/the-turing-way/the-turing-way/pull/3142/commits/d89f02273c42c594b255dc86553d4e46e31e2bb6) (hopefully)
